pplication** https://nlnet.nl/PET/

---

## Abstract: Can you explain the whole project and its expected outcome(s).

The long term vision is to create a research and development working group
focused on the open challenges of privacy and Internet censorship at a network
level. The main goals of the working group are to formulate research problems
based on real-world needs, to conduct high-quality research and to bridge the
gap between academia and industry. Based on the results of the research, we want
to provide practical implementations that can be used by everyone. By design,
all the work is done open source and tightly connected to both academia and
industry.

Currently, we are focusing on r&d of primitives that improve privacy and
metadata resistance of P2P networks. The current open research and engineering
questions are 1) how to build practical and scalable privacy preserving
distributed hash tables and 2) how to design and build privacy preserving peer
assisted CDNs.

The outcomes are 1) p3lib: a library of privacy preserving primitives for anyone
to use in P2P systems (https://github.com/hashmatter/p3lib) 2) implementation
and papers published on practical solutions for enhancing privacy in DHTs (IPFS,
Dat, bittorrent) 3) design and implementing a privacy preserving peer CDN.

## Have you been involved with projects or organisations relevant to this
project before? And if so, can you tell us a bit about your contributions?

I've been a contributor for libp2p and IPFS community in work around CRDTs and
privacy preserving DHTs. I started hashmatter (https://hashmatter.com) where
we've been working towards the outcomes described above, specially on the
research work on privacy preserving DHTs in loose collaboration with friends
form academia. 

## Explain what the requested budget will be used for? 
The project does not have any funding yet. The main goal for the funding is to
create a research and development bounty program to bring researchers, engineers
or anyone interested in privacy preserving P2P networks to contribute on what we
have been working on. At this point we don't have any running costs (hardware,
websites, etc), so the money will be mostly used to bring people to the
community to research on privacy preserving DHTs and help designing and building
private, scalable and fast peer assisted CDN technology that can be used by
anyone in the industry and new comers.

## Compare your own project with existing or historical efforts.
We are trying to bring the academia and industry together around efforts to
improve privacy of P2P networks and services. Historically, academia has been
trying to solve some of the challenges we are focusing without engaging enough
with the industry, while industry tends not to focus enough on privacy (maybe
for lacking the right incentives and knowledge). We would like to close the
academia-industry gap by creating an open source r&d community that solve real
problems and contribute for the research efforts towards a better and more
private Internet.

Protocol Labs are a great example of a r&d company with huge impact through
libp2p, IPFS and Filecoin. We are highly influenced by the modus operandi of
Protocol Labs and would like to replicate it, while focusing on privacy
preserving technologies.

## What are significant technical challenges you expect to solve during the
project, if any?

1) It has been hard to fund the research and development efforts which makes it
hard to get the right people to contribute - this is due to the fact we have no
business model around our technology. This could probably change with the
private peer assisted CDN project although we want to keep everything open
source regardless.

2) Research and open questions: validating ideas in both industry and research
community is hard (but doable) This requires time and effort and a good
technical overview of the problem at hand. Another factor on research is that it
sometimes is open ended and efforts might not produce a very tangible result
that can be applied to the problem at hand. 

3) Community: since there is no enough time and bandwidth, it has been hard to
engage more with researchers and developers and to create a community which
would collaborate with us.

## Describe the ecosystem of the project, and how you will engage with relevant
actors and promote the outcomes?

The ecosystem we've been focusing on is the research community on privacy
enhancing technologies, blockchain industry and research community and P2P and
decentralized companies and projects (e.g. Dat, IPFS, Tor). We have started and
want to keep engaging with the ecosystem players in the following ways:

1) Give technical talks at conferences (e.g. upcoming Data Terra Nemo)

2) Collaborate with PhD candidates and professors working on the research work.

3) Conduct audits of privacy on current P2P networks (e.g peer5, lightning
network, Dat, IPFS, ...), present the results to the project owners, distill
research questions from the result of the audits and propose solutions for them.

4) Design and build primitives for privacy in P2P networks (e.g. p3lib
https://github.com/hashmatter/p3lib) that can be used by the ecosystem in
general. The same libp2p is doing for P2P networking, we want to create p3lib
for privacy.

5) Design and build mechanisms that improve privacy of current companies (e.g.
privacy preserving peer assisted CDNs.) 


