t?

The long term vision is to create a research and development working group
focused on the open challenges of privacy and Internet censorship at a network
level. The main goals of the working group are to formulate research problems
based on real-world needs, to conduct high-quality research and to bridge the
gap between academia and industry. Based on the results of the research, we want
to provide practical implementations that can be used by everyone. By design,
all the work is done open source and tightly connected to both academia and
industry.

Initially, the working group will focus on researching and developing primitives
that improve privacy and metadata resistance of P2P networks. The current open
questions are 1) how to build practical and scalable privacy preserving
distributed hash tables and 2) Private Information Retrieval infrastructure and
MPC protocols for anonymous peer discovery and selection in P2P networks. We
will also work with academia and industry to understand what are other pressing
open research questions in this context, by investing time on "research
development". Research development consists of formulating research questions
and put together the conditions (funding, people, projects, community) for
tackling those questions successfully.

Besides the research work, the working group will also focus on providing
practical tools and primitives for the industry and the community to use.
[p3lib](https://github.com/hashmatter/p3lib) is a current effort in that
direction. p3lib is a toolbox with primitives and protocol implementation that
can be used by system engineers and designers to improve privacy in P2P
networks. As an example, we are currently implementing the primitives necessary
for using onion routing top of a distributed hash table. This process will
trickle down the results from the research to the industry rapidly and creating
a positive feedback that will impact the mission of Internet freedom enormously.

As a by product, we aim at creating and documenting the best practices and
processes on how to conduct quality open source research, so that other working
groups can replicate the model regardless of the r&d field.

### goals?

The long term goal is to create and maintain an open source research and
development working group that focus on the open research questions of network
level privacy and censorship. 

1) formulate research problems based on real-world needs and recent academia
work; 
2) to conduct high-quality research;
3) to bridge the gap between academia and industry and 
4) to advocate about the importance of privacy and anti-censorship technology.

In the short term, we want to focus on researching and developing the building
blocks for metadata resistant DHTs. We believe that P2P systems have the
potential for solving many of the problems of current infrastructure in terms of
privacy and censorship resistance. On the other hand, it has been shown that
naive implementations of P2P systems - and DHTs in particular - are more harmful
to privacy than centralized systems. As an initial phase of the project, we will
focus on private DHT lookups and anonymous relay selection for onion routing in
a P2P network. We also hope to distill the research into practical building
blocks for the community to use. All this process - problem formulation,
research and development - will be open source and carried together with
academia and industry. 

### how?

The first step is to reach out the projects that are relying on DHTs and
understand what are their threat models and open challenges regarding privacy.
Through technical talks and demos, we want to show how current networks (IPFS,
Dat, etc..) are leaking user data and how important it is to harden privacy of
the current implementations. This work has started already. In addition to that,
we'd like to keep finalize a research literature review on metadata resistant
DHTs and keep developing p3lib, which is a toolbox with primitives and protocols
for system developers to use for enhancing privacy of their systems. At the same
time, we would like to engage more with the community and to bring more people
to actively collaborate with the research and development efforts, through open
source or even through paid fellowships.

In a nutshell, the next steps are to 1) engage with the community and show the
importance of designing and implementing privacy preserving P2P networks; 2)
finalize literature review of private DHTs; 3) keep working on p3lib and
understand what primitives are needed to implement next to provide the tools for
system designers to help them; 4) build an open source research and development
community to work on these problems, while documenting the whole process so it
can be used by other communities.  

### who is this project for?

For the privacy and security research community, for the industry which rely on
P2P systems to some degree and for everyone who wish to use services that
respect their freedom and privacy by design.

### why is this project needed?

This project is needed for two reasons: First because we need to research and
develop the building blocks that allow engineers and system designers to
implement systems that do not harm people nor their freedom and rights.
Secondly, because we need to create a model where research community, industry
and open source enthusiasts can contribute to high quality research and
technology, without having to be part of an university to contribute.

### how are key findings and outcomes going to be shared?

We aim at doing community outreach through talks (technical and non-technical)
and workshops to discuss findings with the research community and industry. We
also want to keep all research, notes, discussions online and open source.

---

[OTF IFF description](https://www.opentech.fund/funds/internet-freedom-fund/)
